---
date: 2020-09-13 22:00:01 +0800
title: "Chapter 7: Assembly Language"
excerpt: '"Introduction to Computer Systems" review note'
header:
  teaser: /assets/images/ics-notes/thumb.jpg
  image: /assets/images/ics-notes/image.jpg
category: CS
toc: true
tags:
  - 计算机
---

## The LC-3 Assembly Language

### Base Format

```
LABEL  OPCODE   OPERANDS  ; COMMENTS
```

### Opcodes and operands

<big><strong>ADD</strong></big>

Encoding:

```
0001 DR SR1 0 00 SR2
0001 DR SR1 1 imm5
```

Assembler format:

```
ADD DR, SR1, SR2
ADD DR, SR1, imm5
```

<big><strong>AND</strong></big>

Encoding:

```
0101 DR SR1 0 00 SR2
0101 DR SR1 1 imm5
```

Assembler format:

```
AND DR, SR1, SR2
AND DR, SR1, imm5
```

<big><strong>NOT</strong></big>

Encoding: `1001 DR SR 1 11111`

Assembler format: `NOT DR, SR`

<big><strong>LEA</strong></big>

Encoding: `1110 DR PCoffset9`

Assembler format: `LEA DR, LABEL`

<big><strong>LD</strong></big>

Encoding: `0010 DR PCoffset9`

Assembler format: `LD DR, LABEL`

<big><strong>LDI</strong></big>

Encoding: `1010 DR PCoffset9`

Assembler format: `LDI DR, LABEL`

<big><strong>LDR</strong></big>

Encoding: `0110 BaseR PCoffset9`

Assembler format: `LDR DR, BaseR, offset6`

<big><strong>ST</strong></big>

Encoding: `0011 SR PCoffset9`

Assembler format: `ST SR, LABEL`

<big><strong>STI</strong></big>

Encoding: `1011 SR PCoffset9`

Assembler format: `STI SR, LABEL`

<big><strong>STR</strong></big>

Encoding: `0111 BaseR PCoffset9`

Assembler format: `STR SR, BaseR, offset6`

<big><strong>JMP</strong></big>

Encoding: `1100 000 BaseR 000000`

Assembler format: `JMP BaseR`

*Note:* `RET` *is* `JMP R7`*, when* `BaseR` *is* `111`.

<big><strong>BR</strong></big>

Encoding: `0000 n z p PCoffset9`

Assembler format: `BR(n)(z)(p) LABEL`

<big><strong>JSR / JSRR</strong></big>

Encoding:

```
0100 1 PCoffset11
0100 0 00 BaseR 000000
```

Assembler format:

```
JSR LABEL
JSRR BaseR
```

<big><strong>TRAP</strong></big>

Encoding: `1111 0000 trapvect8`

Assembler format: `TRAP trapvect8`

<big><strong>RTI</strong></big>

Encoding: `1000 000000000000`

Assembler format: `RTI`

### Pseudo-ops (Assembler Directives)

<big><strong>.ORIG</strong></big>

`.ORIG` tells the assembler where to put the first instruction of the program in memory.

<big><strong>.FILL</strong></big> e.g. `.FILL xABCD`

`.FILL` tells the assembler to set aside the next location and fill it with the value of its operand.

<big><strong>.BLKW</strong></big> e.g. `.BLKW #15`

`.BLKW` tells the assembler to set aside a number of sequential locations, specified by its operand.

<big><strong>.STRINGZ</strong></big> e.g. `.STRINGZ "Hello!"`

`.STRINGZ` tells the assembler to initialize the next n+1 location with its operand, which is a string of length n, and the final location is initialized with `x0000`.

<big><strong>.END</strong></big>

`.END` tells the assembler that the assembly program ends here. Contents after it will be neglected.

## The Assembly Process: A Two-Pass Process

### 1. Creating the Symbol Table

During the first pass, the assembler establishes correspondences of labels with their 16-bit memory addresses. It creates a symbol table for reference.

The current location is tracked by a location counter (LC). LC is incremented in every line corresponding to an actual instruction.

### 2. Generating the Machine Language Program

During the second pass, the assembler goes through the assembly program again with the help of the symbol table, and translates each line into machine instructions. It subtracts LC+1 (the incremented PC) from the corresponding address of the label to get the offset. If the offset is too big to fit in the instruction, an assembly error occurs.


