---
date: 2020-09-13 22:00:03 +0800
title: "Chapter 9: TRAP Routines and Subroutines"
excerpt: '"Introduction to Computer Systems" review note'
toc: true
header:
  teaser: /assets/images/ics-notes/thumb.jpg
  image: /assets/images/ics-notes/image.jpg
category: CS
tags:
  - 计算机
---

## TRAP Routines

TRAP routines are a piece of code provided by the operating system. The user program can use a TRAP instruction to request the operating system to run a TRAP routine. TRAP routines are also known as service calls and system calls.

### Why TRAP Routines?

- It saves the work of application programmers (user programmers).
- It is used to operate stuff which requires high privilege. For example, accessing I/O device registers may require high privilege, because if a user application does it wrong, it will create havoc for other programs. Therefore, only TRAP routines have the privilege to access I/O deviced registers. User programs can simply execute TRAP instructions to perform I/O tasks.

### The TRAP Mechanism

The TRAP mechanism involves:

**1. A Set of Service Routines**

These service routines are part of the operating system and start at arbitrary addresses in memory.

**2. The Trap Vector Table**

The Trap Vector Table stores the starting address of each service routine. In LC-3, the Trap Vector Table is stored in memory locations x0000 to x00FF. Due to the size of the Trap Vector Table, LC-3 supports up to 256 service routines.

**3. The TRAP instruction**

In order for a service routine to execute, the user program must run the TRAP instruction.

In LC-3, the TRAP instruction provices the 8-bit trap vector. During the Execute phase of the TRAP instruction's instruction cycle, the following things are done:

- The 8-bit trap vector is zero-extended to a 16-bit address. It indicates an entry in the Trap Vector Table stored between x0000 and x00FF.
- The 16-bit address is loaded into MAR.
- The contents of the entry in the Trap Vector Table is read and loaded into MDR.
- R7 is loaded with the current contents of the PC, which provides a linkage back to the user program before the TRAP routine finishes.
- The contents of the MDR are loaded into the PC.

**4. A Linkage Back to the User Program**

At the end of each service routine, there must be a mechanism for returning control to the user program. This is done by the instruction `JMP R7` (`RET`), since R7 stores the contents of the PC before the TRAP routine is executed.

### Saving and Restoring Registers

When writing or using a TRAP routine or a subroutine, if a value in a register will be needed after a subsequent action which causes something else to be stored in that register, we must *save* it before that subsequent action and *restore* it for use after that subsequent action.

The save/restore problem can be handled either by the calling program (caller-save) or by the called program (callee-save). The appropriate one to handle the problem is the one that knows which registers will be destroyed by the subsequent actions.

### An Example: The Character Output Service Routine

```
          .ORIG x0430
          ST    R1, SaveR1    ; This is the callee-save. R1 will be used
                              ; momentarily to poll the DSR hardware
; Write the character
TryWrite  LDI   R1, DSR
          BRzp  TryWrite
WriteIt   STI   R0, DDR       ; Write character

; Return from TRAP
Return    LD    R1, SaveR1    ; Restore R1
          RET                 ; Identical to "JMP R7"

; Constants
DSR       .FILL xFE04
DDR       .FILL xFE06
SaveR1    .BLKW #1
          .END
```

Note that the R1 is callee-saved, because the callee knows it will be destroyed. Similarly, the user program that invokes this TRAP routine should caller-save R0 and R7 if their contents will be used later.

## Subroutines

### Why Subroutines?

- It can be invoked repetitively.
- Collections of subroutines, called *libraries*, can be provided to programmers to free them from writing their own.

### TRAP Routines and Subroutines

Similarities:

- The Call-Return mechanism is similar. Both need an instruction to load the starting address of the called program to the PC, and a linkage (`JMP R7` / `RET`) back to the user program.

Difference:

- TRAP routines involve operating system resources, and they generally require privileged access to the underlying hardware of the computer.
- Subroutines are written by the same person, a colleague, or provided as part of a library. They are not privileged.

### The JSR(R) Instruction to Call Subroutines

JSR(R) instructions are used to call subroutines. Bit 11 of the instruction specifies the addressing mode, the value 1 if the addressing mode is PC-relative (the last 11 bits are the PCoffset), and the value 0 if the addressing mode is Base addressing (bits 8-6 are the base register).

An example:

```
; Main program
          ...
          JSR   WriteChar
          ...
; Subroutine WriteChar: display the character stored in R2
WriteChar LDI   R3, DSR
          BRzp  WriteChar
          STI   R2, DDR
          RET
DSR       .FILL xFE04
DDR       .FILL xFE06
```

### Library Functions and the `.EXTERNAL` Pseudo-op

The library function and the user program are usually not assembled together (they are in different modules). They will be assembled separately, and will be combined when the *executable image* is produced ("at *link* time"). Therefore, when we assemble the user program, we will need the `.EXTERNAL` pseudo-op to tell the assembler that the label for the library function is in another module, so the assembler will leave it to the linker to deal with the label.

An example:

```
        ...
        .EXTERNAL SQRT ; Tells assembler the label is in another module
        ...
        LD    R4, BASE
        JSRR  R4       ; JSR is more often used to call library functions
;
BASE    .FILL SQRT     ; Value determined at link time
;
; The definition of SQRT is in another separately assembled module
```

